>> David, welcome back to Talk Python To Me.
Great to have you here.
>> Yeah, hello.
>> Hello, hello. Going to be super fun to talk about Flask and more broadly,
Palettes and just all the different projects around Flask and
tools and variations like Cort and so on.
You give a really nice talk at Embedded FlaskCon.
Talk a bit about that in a second, about the state of Palettes.
I thought, let's just take that idea and share it with everyone.
Looking forward to talking about that.
>> Yeah, there's been a lot going on.
>> I bet there has.
I can't remember exactly when you were on,
I think it's about 100 episodes ago,
which puts out a couple of years.
What have you been up to the last couple of years?
>> Just more Flask. It's all Flask all the time.
>> Seems like such a simple API,
but you can work on it forever, right?
>> Yeah, I've acquired a few more libraries,
so I've written more libraries and stuff as well,
but still same job.
Well, I guess I got a house, I got married.
>> Okay. Congratulations, two times.
>> Yeah.
>> That's awesome.
>> A little bit of life changes.
>> Yeah, a little bit. Life keeps marching on. It's amazing.
>> Cool. Well, Flask is certainly one of the most popular web frameworks.
I guess we could start with giving people a sense of the popularity,
but my thought is just like,
"Wow, the pressure of working on something that affects so many folks."
Have you pushed out a change?
>> Yeah. I've had a weird thought before that,
I try not to think about the numbers too often because it's like
a 100 million or more if you add up all the different libraries and stuff a month.
I've had a thought before,
if I push out something that doesn't work for enough people,
that probably has some very minor but noticeable effect on
the tech sector for that day or hour, which is scary.
>> Yeah. It's not quite an AWS US1 East downtime,
but it's also not that.
>> Yeah. I think definitely since I've started,
a lot more people have become aware
of better practices around pinning their dependencies sort of thing.
In part because we did make
some deprecations and then breaking changes in Flask and the other libraries,
and people came to our issue tracker saying,
"You broke something."
Ultimately, I had to tell them,
you need to be using a tool.
There's quite a few tools out now,
although we don't have a lock file standard yet,
but there's pip compile,
there's PDM, there's Rai.
You need to use a tool and pin your dependency tree because then you
can see when there's updates and you can update them deliberately,
and test, and adapt to those changes.
I was giving that message a lot in the beginning,
and over the past five years or so,
I've definitely had to post it less often.
I feel like more people are aware of those tools and practices now.
>> I would also add that the tooling has gotten a lot better at that.
It used to be, "Okay, so what you're going to do is you're going to
write a requirements.txt file and then you set your versions explicitly."
That, for many people,
only addressed the primary dependencies,
not the transitive dependency.
They might pin Flask, but did they pin Werkzeug?
I don't know. They may have, probably they didn't.
Unless these pip freeze,
but then you gather a bunch of garbage that isn't actually about your project,
that got sucked in from some other thing.
It was really funky before.
I don't know, you mentioned pip-tools and pip compile.
I am loving that workflow these days.
>> Yeah, that's what I've switched all the projects themselves to.
If you go look at Flask or Werkzeug or any of those,
we have a requirements folder with
different environment files that say,
"Here are our direct dependencies," and then we compile those into
fully locked dependencies and all our tests run off of those,
our build and publish workflow runs off of those.
It's not quite the same because those are
our development dependencies instead of our runtime dependencies,
but it's still really helpful just to know that if we don't do anything,
our process will continue to work because it worked last time.
If we have contributors, it sprints.
Now, it's much easier.
I had a problem the first few sprints I was running where every developer would
try to set up their own machine and get different versions of things.
>> Right, point in time snapshots,
just whenever they got started, right?
>> Yeah. Now, they all install the exact same list of dependencies,
so everybody's development environment looks exactly the same,
which is a lot more usable.
>> Yeah, that's excellent. I have the same workflow.
I have a top-level dependencies that I actually would consider my dependencies,
and then I unpinned and I pip compiled those to a pin dependencies,
and I just do the upgrade when I feel like,
"Oh, let's go get some new dependencies and see how that goes."
Yeah, very nice. Well, let's start with FlaskCon.
I called it an embedded conference.
This is different than it has been before.
I think FlaskCon at one point was a purely online one,
or maybe that was just COVID,
and it was just a matter of time, I don't remember.
>> It was timing, really.
Years ago, right before COVID started or quarantine started,
I had been working myself up to do an in-person conference.
It's something I've wanted to do for a while because I love attending conferences.
I love the community around it.
DjangoCon happened in San Diego a few times,
and that was really fun because I just crashed it.
I was the Flask person, San Diego Flask person.
I was getting ready to do that and then COVID happened,
but some other members of the community,
the pallets team and community stepped up and said,
"Hey, we can do an online one."
Running a conference, even online, is very hard.
There's a lot of stuff to keep track of.
>> Oh, yeah.
>> We ran three online conferences.
I think 2020, 2021, and 2023.
I think we skipped 'em too.
But those are all on pyvideo.org if you want to find them.
Then FlaskCon 2024 is there also.
I finally got the opportunity with PyCon.
They previously had this hatchery program where you could propose,
"I want to do this event," and the hatchery program will say,
"That sounds great.
We will handle the venue,
the food, the insurance, the legal stuff.
You get one of our rooms and you can do whatever you want in it,
or whatever you propose in it."
Last year at PyCon,
I talked to some of the organizers and they suggested,
"Hey, the hatchery is coming back.
This would be a great way to do it."
So that you don't have to learn everything at once.
You can practice.
>> Right.
>> Yeah. We managed to do some advertising.
It's hard to advertise new conferences in general,
and then especially now that a lot of the Python community is not on Twitter anymore.
I'm not. Even if they were,
everything is fragmented more.
So it was hard to get the reach and get enough CFP proposals.
But we did get a few and ended up
accepting two people from the community that gave just wonderful talks.
>> I saw one on doing PWAs.
What was the other one on?
The talks.
>> Was it progressive monomers? No, there's one on-
>> Single page, sorry.
>> There's one on observability.
>> Yeah, PWAs or single page apps and the extension ecosystem,
and the idea around defining Flask plugins.
Then there's my talk, which was just the subject of this podcast.
>> Welcome people. We've been up to you.
Yeah, that's cool. So will it maybe be a PyCon next year?
Or are you going to branch out?
>> I don't know yet.
I think they would accept me back,
but I wouldn't want to.
I kind of view the hatchery.
I don't know if this is true, but I view the hatchery as like,
we're going to help you get started,
but not keep coming back for the same thing.
I don't want to take it.
>> Right. I'm a 10-year rookie.
You're not a rookie anymore. Get out here with a, make your place.
>> I would still love to run a conference,
somewhat selfishly so that I can run one in San Diego or on the West Coast at least.
>> That's what I was going to say. How about San Diego?
Then we can all come down there and stay by the beach.
>> Yeah. I mentioned DjangoCon before,
but they stayed in San Diego for three years straight at this little hotel.
It was really nice, had a pool.
People just congregated and it was like 15-minute drive for me.
Next year at PyCon, I might not be there.
We're expecting our daughter to be born in January next year.
>> Congratulations. That might take precedence over PyCon?
>> I'm going to have a lot less time in general,
which will come up in other things we're going to talk about.
But yeah, I probably for the first time since 2016 or 2015,
I will not go to PyCon probably.
There was a conference.
This was the last conference I went to before quarantine.
Two weeks before quarantine hit,
I went up to Los Angeles for PyBeach,
which was this very small first-time conference.
I just love those little ones.
I met the organizer, Nick Cantar,
at North Bay Python a few times now and I've told him,
"Look, we should try to bring that back."
I think there's a few other people who are interested as well.
It doesn't have to be FlaskCon specifically,
but if I could run some local conference,
I could use some Flask stuff or attract some Flask stuff.
>> Well, I'm pretty excited that PyCon is going to be in Long Beach year after next.
>> Yeah. Two years from now, that'll be really nice as well.
>> That'll be really nice, but maybe you can drum up a bunch of interest and
connect with a lot of people who are conference goers of that place,
but encourage them to sign up for a list and get notified
about whatever this other thing is.
Because it'll be in the same basic neighborhood.
>> Yeah.
>> Jazzy out in the audience asks,
"Can we attend FlaskCon online?"
>> This year, or this in-person one in 2024,
we weren't able to do that,
but all the talks are available now on our YouTube channel.
If you just search FlaskCon 2024,
you'll find it or pyvideo.org has all of them listed.
The first three we ran were purely online,
so you could watch them streaming.
This year, we just didn't have the infrastructure for it,
so we couldn't really manage to do a live stream and the recordings at the same time.
I was lucky enough to get Elaine Wong's help doing the recordings,
and she brought all her cool specialized equipment.
So we were able to get the recordings up really fast at least.
>> Yeah, that's really good. Are the ones for PyCon even up yet?
I don't think they are. Not that I'm aware of.
>> Maybe they're going really slowly, but yeah, it was really nice.
We just recorded this hard drive and she was like,
"Oh, you guys timed all your starts and stops really well."
So all I have to do is do these simple cuts and it's all up.
>> Just trim the edges and upload. Perfect.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah, that's really cool.
So yeah, I'll link to the playlist of FlaskCon 2024 for folks in the show notes.
They can check that out. Awesome.
Well, we'll see what 2025 brings.
Hopefully, some more good conference.
>> Yeah, we might have other team members besides me attending PyCon as well.
So we'll see what happens.
>> Sure. Get someone else to carry the torch.
>> [inaudible] space or something. So there's always something going on.
>> Yeah, for sure. Now, I want to talk about the state of Palettes in 2024.
But surely there are quite a few people out there who listen,
or really new to Python and programming.
You'd be surprised. A lot of people say they use it like this podcast,
like language immersion, like you want to learn Portuguese,
you move to Brazil,
you want to learn Python, you just put on your earbuds and listen till it makes sense.
So especially for those folks, what is Palettes?
>> Palettes is an open-source organization.
So we're not a company,
but we do have a team of volunteer open-source maintainers.
Who volunteer their free time to work on Flask and the libraries that make up Flask.
That was its purpose when it was created was,
hey, Flask has these set of libraries.
Arvin, the original author of them was not as involved in them anymore,
and he wanted the community to be more involved in them.
So he created this organization.
This was right around when I was becoming maintainer too, eight years ago.
So it's the organization that holds those projects
and the team that maintains and sets policies and that sort of thing.
So Flask is the most popular library though,
everybody heard of, followed by Jinja and Click.
But then we also have Versoic,
which is the lower level stuff below Flask,
and then Markup Safe and It's Dangerous are
two little helper libraries for those things.
And then now we've also got Cort, which is the async version of Flask.
That's an official Palettes project now,
even though it started as just kind of a separate thing made by Flask.
Yeah, it was an outside thing that Philip Jones worked on,
and now it's coming closer and closer to being official.
Yeah, and we're doing a lot of work on that
to kind of try to unify Flask and Cort as much as possible.
So behind the scenes, they're sharing a lot more code now.
Cort, like Versoic is all the low level request response handling
for the Flask users, and Cort wasn't using that at first
because it needed like much more async things,
but we've managed to develop a lot more things called,
the term is called SansIO, like without input/output,
where we have all like the behavior that's common to both,
and it doesn't require asyncIO versus sync processes
shared between Cort and Flask.
And eventually, we're slowly moving in that direction.
The idea is that at some point you will not pip install Cort
or import Cort anymore.
You'll just pip install Flask and then do like
from Flask import Cort instead.
And so that will be in the library as well
once we get to like a point that we're really comfortable with.
I see you're shipping one thing.
Will you be able to use the same app?
You know, we say at app get, or will that be a--
Yeah, that's the one thing--
App F equals Flask and app Q equals Cort?
Yeah, you'll still have one single app,
but you're going to have to pick ahead of time.
We've tried to think of ways around this,
but just the way that Flask is constructed
means that so much of it is customizable by extensions.
And those hook APIs that extensions can customize,
all the extensions out there expect that they're sync,
they're def whatever, not async def, whatever, right?
And maybe we'll figure out something,
but so far we can't figure out a way to
unify that into a single object.
So you're going to have to still pick,
I want to be async first or sync first.
- Yeah. - Yeah.
But at least it'll be in one place.
Like you're not going to have to decide,
oh, I need to know about Cort.
You can just look at the Flask docs and see like,
oh, I'm going to be doing mostly like web requests
or like video processing or something
that's like the IO intensive.
I should pick Cort or I'm just doing like the basic API
that everybody makes for their data science project.
I just need Flask.
- Okay. - Yeah.
Yeah, yeah. Really interesting.
Question out in the audience,
will it, it sounds like it'll work both
WSGI and ASGI.
Any future where it just goes all async?
Not likely in the short term, it sounds like, right?
- Yeah. Like Flask will always be WSGI
because it's so tied to how sync processes work.
ASGI has an ability to,
and so like if you use like Hypercorn,
which is a popular ASGI server,
which is also by Phil from Cort,
you can run a WSGI application as an ASGI application.
You don't necessarily get all the benefits of ASGI,
but you can at least run it with that.
And kind of like in a similar vein,
like if you're using Cort,
you can write both sync and async things
and they all just work together.
- Yeah. - You just,
and with Flask, you can write async stuff in Flask right now.
You just don't get the benefits of ASGI's connection pooling.
So you're still doing one worker per request response,
but you can in that worker kick off like async code.
- Right. Okay. - More easily.
- Interesting. Yeah. I've done stuff for like FastAPI.
I've written a decorator that it decorates
both sync and async methods.
And it's pretty tricky.
There's just basically,
- Yeah. - It has two wrappers.
It goes, all right, well, which are you?
We're gonna actually apply that one to you.
You know, it's tricky to juggle.
And then all the plugins,
like it's gotta be a gnarly combination.
- Yeah. We're like, basically,
we're just like taking it in baby steps.
And we're hoping like, as we keep unifying their code,
like their shared code more and more,
we can start like discovering like good patterns
for writing an extension that works in both, for example,
and documenting those and maybe helping some extensions
that are popular update to that.
- Yeah. - So it's a slow process,
but like it's surmountable.
- Yeah. Maybe you get to a point where they're close enough.
You're like, oh, now it's really obvious
how these things unify.
At the beginning, it wasn't right.
Okay. So what's the state?
How are things?
- What's the state?
- Maybe start with the big boy flask.
- And Inbox Zero is like one of the biggest takeaways.
- Inbox Zero. - Yeah.
- It was actually, that wasn't 2024.
That was a 2021 or 22, I think.
But- - Look at that.
- Yeah. We don't have like true zero most of the time,
although I do get down to it every now and then.
But I did hit Inbox Zero.
So when I first started maintaining all these libraries,
I think combined,
there was probably over a thousand open issues and PRs.
And that's a nightmare if you know all the code,
like if you were the author,
but I was not the author of this code.
Like, so I was both unfamiliar with the internals
of all these libraries
and like had to keep track of all these issues.
So I was like learning libraries,
learning how to be a maintainer
and trying to keep track of like all these requests
going back and forth and like computing PRs
and all that sort of stuff.
So it was early on, it was a goal I identified of like,
I just need to make this manageable.
And once I got there, it's become a lot easier.
Like once you're at Inbox Zero,
it's a lot easier to keep it hovering.
- It is. I'm really feeling,
I'm feeling rough about my true inbox.
I'm looking at like five or six persistent emails.
I really got to get back to you,
but it's a whole different deal than if it's 10,000.
Did you declare any sort of bankruptcy equivalent
of like, you know,
any sort of bankruptcy equivalent of like inbox bank,
where you just go like archive a good,
like if it's two years or older,
I'm just going to archive it
and it'll come back if it matters.
Or did you literally go through everyone and deal with it?
- I did go through everyone individually.
I didn't just blanket say everything
older than two years is closed.
But I did kind of treat things as like,
I don't like stale bots.
So we don't run a stale bot.
- Yeah, I don't like those either.
- Yeah.
- Yeah. Like I don't object to things being closed,
like as the resolution versus fixed,
but I want like somebody to be making that decision.
- Right, right.
- You know, and put a reason behind it.
So yeah, I tried like going through every single issue.
Basically my workflow is just every single day,
pick an issue, work on it,
pick another one, okay, it's been a couple hours,
wait until the next day.
And yeah, just like had to keep making calls on them.
- Yeah, you're like, all right, two come in a day,
I'm going to do 20 a day until I catch up.
It sounds like that, right?
- There was a lot of stuff also where it was,
it had just been sitting open for years, you know,
and nobody had really commented on it besides like,
or maybe they had, the most people had commented
on it was saying like, me too,
but they hadn't actually like moved the discussion forward.
And I, you know,
it would be nice if open source,
if like more people like contribute,
I don't blame anybody for not contributing,
you know, or being a contributor,
but I would love to like attract more,
you know, long-term contributors and stuff.
But that's like kind of the way it starts
is you need to like help people like make calls
and stuff, evaluate things, right?
You know, instead of saying me too,
start looking into it and saying like, okay, me too.
And okay, here's all the like issues
that might come up when we do this,
or I looked at the code base
and we could do it this way, you know?
- Right, exactly.
- People are doing it.
- I also want it, but I want it,
and I think here's a path forward,
or here's a prototype.
- Yeah, you know, like we have to advance the conversation.
And that wasn't like happening in a lot of the old issues.
So I did kind of like,
I didn't outright just close old issues,
but like I did say like, okay, this thing is old
and it hasn't seen any movement.
Or like, there's a lot of things also where it's like,
yeah, it's a reasonable request,
but is it necessary for Flask?
Does it belong in Flask or in extension, right?
Like this is something I'm trying to figure out.
Like I want to be writing like documentation
for other maintainers on the team, you know?
So they understand like how I did this sort of stuff.
And this is like the trickiest problem.
I don't know how I'm gonna document yet,
but like I got a sense over time of just like
being able to really quickly make a call
of like yes or no on things.
- Right, good fit, bad fit, let's go.
- I can look at an issue and say like,
okay, no, this doesn't belong in for XYZ or something.
Because like Flask, like all the libraries in Palettes
have like very focused core, like goal of them.
And they try to be extensible to some degree.
So a lot of the things you can do by picking extension.
So really what I try to look for is like,
I need this thing in Flask
because it is literally not possible
to write an extension to do this
without being able to like hook into it this way
or something like that.
- No, that makes sense, sure.
Part of the Zen of Flask is that it's minimal.
And then you build around it, you pick your database,
you pick your whatever, and then go from there.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, cool, all right, well, three open issues.
And incredible, as in 67,000 stars,
that's also pretty incredible.
Let's see, so you joined each one of these different ones,
you kind of gave a sense of like how many downloads.
So for Flask, maybe these numbers changed,
but I think it hasn't been but a couple months.
It's around 75 million downloads a month.
That's a hefty chunk of user base there.
- Yeah, I occasionally look at pypistats.org or pepi.tech
are the two like websites that track these numbers.
So I can look at the current one.
For Flask is downloads.
Downloads in the last day, 3.15 million.
Downloads in the last month, 66 million.
- Okay, good summertime, people are chilling.
Yeah, look at that, yeah.
- Yeah, and there's like, sometimes there's like random,
you can see in this graph here,
like there's just random times
where it just suddenly drops by like a couple hundred thousand
or rises.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
- Like if you look at the left half of this graph, it's higher.
But like, I think that's just because like big services
like come in and out of existence
or like do an upgrade or whatever.
- Right.
- So there are some very big systems out there
that are just downloading, doing a ton of downloads.
- Yeah, it's pretty wild.
- It's definitely wild.
- You'll probably also spot some PyPI outages.
- Well, I imagine in that graph, which has got nothing to do.
- And like they also change the way they report over time,
like pip and stuff change how they report statistics.
So I usually just look at like the overall numbers,
which should be pretty consistent.
- Yeah.
- Try not to look at it too often.
Like I said at the beginning,
like it's a big number to know that like this many people
are about to download any change you make.
- Yeah, and when I think about these kinds of numbers,
it's not just if you make a change to Flask,
then it affects this many people,
but these are themselves applications using this,
each of which has many, many, many users potentially.
So there's a multiplier on top of this, right?
- Yeah.
And yeah, that's been difficult.
That's one of the other state of Flask.
That's the other half of the state of Flask
is like we've been making a lot of progress,
but like this amount of responsibility
rests pretty heavily on me.
It can be pretty stressful.
- And you did mention a baby
and being potentially tired in the future
and stuff like that as well, right?
- Yeah, exactly.
But like combined, these numbers combined with the thought
that anything I do could break a bunch of people
and get them to complain at me
or people will complain at me
even if I don't break a ton of people.
And it's just kind of like the ever present notion
of we are not at inbox zero on some of the projects
and stuff, so there is still a lot of open stuff.
- Sure.
- Yeah, it's a lot of stress for me.
And it's been, I've like suffered burnout a few times
per year for the last four years or so.
- Oh man, that's rough.
Are you getting some support from the other people
at the org and potentially from outside?
- Yeah, there are other people on the team.
So it's not like we're a bus factor of one
in the sense of like, if I was not here for some reason,
other people would have access to these things
and could keep them going.
But the reality is not to downplay all the work
that they do in the community
when they are working on code.
But like I do probably 90% of the code
and like the decision-making and all that sort of stuff.
- Right.
- So it would definitely be a very different project
if I wasn't around.
- It would at minimum be a scramble, right?
Like when Guido stepped down, like, wait a minute.
Who's doing what now?
- Yeah, so like, so this is what I've been like trying
to work for a long time
because I've kind of always recognized
that I've been kind of the not limiting factor,
but like I'm like the point of failure in this thing.
And so I've been trying to grow the team
and trying to make our processes more automated,
you know, and then now what I'm trying to do is,
because I know I have this hard deadline in January
when I'm gonna have less time,
is I'm trying to document how to do what I've learned to do,
like how to be a maintainer.
'Cause something we don't really have a lot of,
it feels like is, you know,
we have a contributing guide, right?
Or we have user documentation or a developer guide,
like how to use Flask.
But we don't have a how to maintain Flask documentation.
- Yeah.
- It seems to be kind of missing from the community in general.
- Yeah, I presume that'd be out in public.
People interested could check it out
whenever that gets written.
- Oh yeah, it's not like a private,
it's not gonna be a private thing, but-
- Yeah, of course.
- It's not ready yet,
but it's something I'm actively working on
is like identifying like all the stuff
I've accumulated in my head
and what I've learned how to do
or decisions I've made or like services we use.
Like just the fact that, oh, you know,
we're part of the PSF.
This is how you contact the PSF.
- Yeah, what does that mean?
- It's not written down.
- Who do I call?
Yeah, exactly.
- Or like that we're part of Tidelift
and you know, these other donation sources.
- Yeah.
- Also like stuff like how do I make a decision
on whether to keep something closed or opened
or when is it time to make a new release
or what is our version policy
or our support policy or our security policy?
Like a lot of these things are under documented right now
if they're documented at all.
And so that's kind of my goal for the rest of this year
is to like make palettes more sustainable
regardless of how much availability I have.
- Maybe a little more systematized,
maybe a little bit.
So before we move off of PyPI stats,
Kusra has an interesting meta question.
Is PyPI stats built on Flask itself?
Do you have any idea?
- I have no idea.
I know they're open source.
- Oh yeah, okay.
So maybe you could tell that way.
I was gonna say there's not like a header
or something that Flask sends.
So yeah.
- I can't find it.
- Yeah, we don't know.
It is open source.
Oh, here we go.
Here we go.
Have we got a requirement?
We've got a pyproject.toml.
- Oh yeah, it's Flask.
- Ah, there you have it.
- I love that.
- There we go, beautiful.
- It's very rewarding every time I find out a new place
that like just decided to use Flask and has been using it.
And it's just completely behind the scenes
and you can't tell like nothing's,
like it's all just working.
- Yeah.
- But I love going to like conferences for that reason too.
'Cause so many people come up to me and like say like,
"Oh yeah, we use Flask to like run the Mars rover."
Or somebody, one of the people giving a talk at FlaskCon
was like, "My company writes the like energy management software
for this conference center and it's in Flask."
It's very fun to learn all those new uses.
- Have you ever gotten onto the JPL?
I know it's like a couple hours drive.
That'd be fun, right?
To go out there and actually see the Flask code,
see it, this is what runs in the rover and the helicopter.
Awesome, all right, so that's Flask.
What one do you wanna talk about next?
Next on my tab list, I got Jinja,
we can go wherever you want.
So like maybe that a good foundation?
- Yeah, we did like Flask and Verisker are pretty tied
because most of the stuff that people report to Flask
is actually an issue with one of the other libraries
that Flask is using.
And most often that's with Veriskzeug.
So you can see we're not at inbox zero,
we're at inbox nine right now.
- That's incredible.
You know, maybe like I asked you to explain palettes,
like Veriskzeug, that's probably not how English speaking
folks would say that,
Werkzeug or Werkzug or something, right?
But Armin Rnneker, the creator of this is German
or Austrian but speaks German.
And so that's the German pronunciation.
And hence, that's why we're saying it that way, right?
- That's probably best approximation.
And I'm sure I'm doing it wrong also.
- It's pretty close.
- Yeah, it literally is like,
like it means like work thing, which is like tool.
- Yeah, yeah, basically tool.
Yeah, it's like tools, like work your work,
your carpentry tools or yes, handyman tools type thing.
Yeah.
- Yeah, but this was written before Flask existed.
And I think it was written more when like WSGI
was becoming a spec.
Or had just become a spec,
because it is just a bunch of utilities
for doing HTTP header parsing,
doing all the low level WSGI environment management,
wrapping that information in request and response objects.
So you can kind of work with them a little easier.
So it's all like the underlying tools that you need
to build Flask.
There's also like the whole routing system,
so you can in Flask, you just do @app.route.
But behind the scenes, what that's doing
is it's adding it to a route map that VeriXoig defines.
And that defines like,
here's how we actually like collect that
and like turn it into a bunch of rules
that we can match URLs against.
And there's other things in there as well,
the reloader, the debugger, the dev server.
- Yeah, so one of the updates you gave on VeriXoig
is a performance improvement
by way of getting rid of the strbytes duopoly.
- Yeah, I've been doing a lot in VeriXoig.
So that one and the urllib one that we'll talk about
were two big things.
But basically like this library,
like I just described it,
it's like just a huge collection of tools
and little utility functions.
And there's a history there
because when all these libraries first started,
Python 3 didn't exist or barely existed.
And so everything was written originally for Python 2
where strings and bytes worked a lot different.
(both laughing)
- That was one of the primary breaking changes.
There were other changes, but that was the long,
the one that people really had a long live bug tracking.
You know, if it's different syntax,
you just change the syntax.
But if it's subtle behavior changes,
then trouble looms.
- Yeah.
And so, yeah, in Python 2,
it was much easier to like, well not,
yeah, it was easier to treat like incoming data as bytes,
but like treat it as a string.
There wasn't like as big a distinction
between strings and bytes,
which was convenient in some ways,
especially for like low level tools like HTTP,
or you just work in ASCII bytes.
- Yeah, say if you like ASCII, it's probably fine.
If you don't like ASCII, you might not like it so much.
- Yeah, but it also like caused,
like I first learned Python 3,
so I like, I like have a different perspective on this,
but I like Python 3's distinction.
I think it's much better to have that distinction.
- Yeah, you and me both.
- Yeah, strings and bytes.
But at the time, like when it was first happening,
it wasn't as clear cut.
Like, oh yeah, this is better, or this is easier,
because you had to support both.
And so when Python 3 came out
and started getting like more momentum,
all these libraries tacked on support
for both Python 2 and Python 3,
which among other things meant that you had to
now check for like whether you were getting strings
or bytes everywhere,
because you might be in Python 2 land where you're getting bytes
or you might be in Python 3 land where you're getting strings
and need to like do other conversions.
Verxoid was especially bad
because it's a collection of like kind of
independent utility functions.
Some functions build on each other,
but every function could potentially be imported
and used for its own little piece of functionality.
And so every single function
needed to check all its arguments
for like five, six, seven bytes.
Even if most of the time, especially nowadays,
people aren't using Verxoid directly in all these tools.
They're using Flask,
which just does the right thing from the get-go,
which means all those intermediate checks on the way
were totally unnecessary,
because you already knew from like the first function.
- Right, right.
You're testing 10 times for the same thing down the call stack.
- Right, and this was just pervasive throughout Verxoid.
It was just everywhere with all these unnecessary checks,
and it made the code more complex to maintain,
reason about, made the like execution slower.
There's kind of another thing going on at the same time,
which is like, we had, because we could support,
like, because we were working with bytes in a lot of places,
there was also like a lot more support for,
well, maybe the data is encoded in this encoding or this one.
But nowadays, everybody,
like I looked at, before I made this decision,
I looked at stats.
Everybody, 99.5% of people,
web applications on the web right now,
are using UTF-8.
So they're never dealing with their encodings.
And UTF-8 can encode everything.
- Yeah.
- And so like,
Verxoid was doing all these things
about letting you pass encodings all over the place
and switch between things,
and that was also complexity.
So I finally decided, okay,
I had heard some anecdotes as well
from people who had switched from
using Python 2 to Python 3,
or had stuck with Python 2 and old versions of Verxoid
because they had noticed a significant performance difference
in the first versions of Verxoid
that added that 2 and 3 compatibility.
And so I figured, okay, I'm gonna get a similar speed up
if I remove that now,
now that we don't support Python 2 at all.
That was very complicated.
I basically just had to go through every single function
and start removing it,
run all the tests, see what failed,
pick another function to keep working on
and just slowly, slowly pull it all apart.
But I did end up with,
so now Verxoid just supports strings everywhere,
except in the very few places
where it works directly with the request and response data.
- Right, like multi-part form file.
- Yeah, when you first get the request in,
and it's just the raw body
that you might turn into JSON or form data, et cetera.
Or when you're finally producing the response
and taking either file data, which is binary,
or string data and turning it into the bytes.
That's the only place now where it deals with bytes.
Everywhere else is strings.
And the boundary there is always UTF-8.
And if UTF-8 isn't your thing,
it's not, we're not preventing you from using other things.
It just means that when you're at those boundaries,
you pick the new, you can take the bytes directly
and work with them.
Surprisingly, I have gotten,
like this was a huge, massive change,
and I have not gotten any bug reports about it.
Which I'm just, I'm just,
I was stressing so much about like, okay, this is huge.
I mean, we tested it first
and made beta releases and everything,
but those go to almost no touch.
- All right, I can't leave the house
for the next week, publish.
- Yeah, no, like you joke,
but like seriously, when I hit the publish button,
or when I used to hit the publish button,
I would be like, I want to go for a walk now
because I just did a ton of work
and I just want to clear my head.
But oh God, then an hour later,
an hour from now when I get back,
what is my inbox going to look like?
- Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
- Okay, that is going to be done.
- That's great.
And you know, you talk,
another part of your presentation at FlaskCon
was about project level stuff.
And you also talked about the systemization
type of thing you're looking for.
So one of the things you switched to
is the trusted publishers.
That's kind of cool, right?
- Yeah, so I mentioned a little bit
about like when we were talking about,
sorry, when we were talking about
pinning requirements, I was saying,
oh, you know, it makes it a lot easier
for every contributor to work on things at Sprint
if every single environment is the same.
And so kind of on a meta level,
there's a lot of like different tools
and configurations and workflows we use across projects,
but they've kind of been developed over time
as I've learned them.
And so I've been doing work on like a meta level.
So every project now,
if you go look at Flask and VeriXoic and Jinja
and you clone all the repos,
all the repos look exactly the same.
They all have the same files,
the same directory layout,
same tool configurations, et cetera.
Because just like it should be easy
for every contributor to get the same environment,
it should be easy for anybody
who's used to contributing to Flask
to go over to VeriXoic
and be just as comfortable in that project.
- It's the Flask way and it all goes the same, right?
- So yeah, like Trusted Publishing,
that was another big part of this
was like making workflows.
So we have a workflow for running tests, for example.
But publishing used to be a very manual process.
And it's evolved over the years too
because we were on Travis before
and then we needed to make like Windows builds
for Markup Safe, which has wheels.
So we were on AppVeyor also.
And then Travis went away and stuff
and GitHub Actions became more.
And so, but like that was all for tests.
Like for building,
we basically had to build a web app
and we basically,
when we wanted to make a new release,
it was way harder in the past,
which is why releases happened less often
because I would have to say like,
okay, I'm ready.
Do all the little bookkeeping stuff
to like set the release version
and the release date and everything.
Now I have to go get my Mac,
get my Windows machine,
get my Linux machine,
make the builds on all of them.
- Oh my gosh.
- Then manually like consolidate them
and upload them manually to PyPI, et cetera,
and make sure that all worked.
So what I have now is I have a standard publish workflow
on every single project.
It works exactly the same way.
And you make a PR
so that you can see all the tests run.
You know, you make a PR that just does that version bump
and the date, you know, says the release date.
You watch all the tests pass
and then you push a tag before you merge.
You push the release tag.
And that kicks off the build workflow.
So we run our build.
We do SLSA or Salsa out of station
to say like these builds are associated
with these commits in Git
and were built by these workers.
It's kind of like a supply chain level thing.
And then we automatically,
like it will collect all that stuff,
show you here's the release,
like here's a draft release for this.
Here are all the,
like you have one more opportunity
to look at the files
and then a maintainer can go in
and click publish in GitHub's UI.
And that will kick off like,
okay, maintainer said everything's good.
We're just gonna upload it now.
And that's all automated.
You don't, we're using the trusted workflow,
trusted publishing workflow
between PyPI and GitHub.
So I no longer have to have my password stored locally
for PyPI or have like tokens made for each project.
All the authentication happens
between GitHub and PyPI automatically and securely.
It's pretty cool.
If you go look up like trusted publishing on,
PyPI has like a blog or documentation that explains it.
But it is really, really convenient.
And it makes like this whole workflow
means that whenever I wanna make a new release,
I just make a regular PR, push a tag
and then see everything pass and say, yes, we're good.
So I just basically have to push three buttons now.
- Yeah, that's fantastic.
- Which makes it a lot easier
to just make more regular releases.
Like even bug fix releases,
I was always unwilling to make them fast
because it was so much work.
- Yeah, well, if it's a matter of just pushing a commit
and then saying, okay,
you're way more likely to quickly ship fixes
and ship smaller releases and all sorts of stuff.
It's really good.
And you don't have the whole supply chain problem
of your machine somehow got hacked,
but then now when you do your build,
somebody's injected something gnarly into the wheel, right?
'Cause it never goes through you.
It just goes from GitHub directly to PyPI
through GitHub actions, right?
- Yeah, and GitHub added their own.
So the SLSA out of station that I was talking about,
if you scroll down on this screen,
you can see that multiple.intodo.jsonl.
If you click on it, it's just a big blob of text.
But that's basically describing here are these wheel file,
like those wheel files and SDIS files.
And here's like signatures and about like GitHub environment
that build this and everything.
GitHub itself is adding that's a similar sort of out of station
and then PyPI is also adding more out of stations.
It's not out yet though,
but I'm sure I will be testing it once they're starting it.
And once they release it in beta.
So being able to attest that like our build environment
was consistent with what the artifacts you're seeing
and like the upload along the way was secured
and like it is gaining more,
like that's more gaining more attention nowadays.
- Yeah, that's really.
It's excellent.
It also makes it easier to hand it over to someone else
and trust that they're doing it right.
Not like something,
they only like Windows 7.
So you got a weird wheel or something now.
- Yeah, I mean, this, yeah, this one it sounds like
was such an impediment to finding other maintainers
because you had to teach like,
I think I probably had some document
that explained how to do this build before.
Like all the steps I went through,
but it was like, it was so complicated.
And like, yeah, if somebody else wanted to make a release,
I would have to make sure they did everything correctly.
I had just gotten used to it.
It was like rote for me, but it was a lot of steps.
Now it's just, anybody does the same,
make a PR, push a button.
Everything else is done for them.
Yeah.
- Yeah, that's awesome.
All right, so the two takeaways that I got
from Verkzoig's update was this dropping
of the two to three juggling
made it 50% faster for request response.
And URL lib is no longer URL lib-ish.
- Yeah, yeah, so that was the other part.
If we're going back to Verkzoig,
so we removed the string bytes testing all over the place.
And Verkzoig, this was again, historically
because of like Python two versus Python three differences
and then compatibility and stuff.
But another of the changes in Python three was URL lib.
In Python two, there was like URL lib and URL lib two.
And that's why there's also the project URL lib three.
But Python three kind of consolidated that back
into URL lib with sub packages instead.
So it kind of changed the interfaces
and where everything was.
So at the time it made sense for Verkzoig
to just copy that code into our own code base
and then make our own tweaks to it
to be compatible with everything.
And, but what that ended up meaning was
we had an entire copy of URL lib
with our own tweaks in our code base.
And then we weren't keeping up with changes.
So like CPython has like a hundred different core devs on it.
I mean, they're not all paying attention to URL lib
but they're making regular security updates
or just performance improvements and that sort of stuff.
And we're not getting any of those benefits
because we now have like this vendored copy
that we've changed ourselves.
We couldn't even bring in the changes.
And just like the string bytes everywhere,
having that our own copy of that really complex
low-level code made it harder to reason about the code
and be like, maintain it.
And all this stuff is kind of like,
it's not the essential parts of Verkzoig.
Verkzoig is like trying to be the WSGI utilities and stuff.
It's not trying to be like every single possible,
like it's not trying,
we don't need to make our own URL lib utility
and everything to be Verkzoig.
So that was another big one where I identified like,
okay, this is just a lot of complexity.
I didn't actually expect this to be
a performance improvement,
but when I actually went through and removed URL lib
and our own copy and replaced it with Python's version,
we got like a 30% speed up just on our own.
So the combined of those two big changes
was like about a 50% speed up in our request response.
- Yeah, that's awesome.
- And we just, like, it turns out that the,
like Python's implementation of all this
was just faster than ours.
And it still does all the same things.
- Yeah, and now you don't have to mess with it.
You get it for free.
- Yeah, exactly.
- Like everyone else.
- We can, we're like, a lot of these changes,
a lot of the changes in all the libraries
are stuff where I've been, like I said,
I wasn't the original author of this stuff.
So I've had to like learn the code basis.
I've had to like dig into them and say like,
what is written here?
Why is it written this way?
How is it all related?
And along the way, I just keep identifying like,
okay, this is the actual purpose of this library.
Does this fit into that purpose?
Or can we be doing something different?
And so kind of trying to like slim down the libraries
and like focus, tighten up there,
the focus on their like purposes more.
- Right, if there's parts that are, it needs to work,
but it's not its purpose,
maybe that can come from somewhere else, yeah.
- Mm-hmm, yeah.
- All right, we got about 10.
Yeah, absolutely.
We've got about 10 more minutes, tops probably.
So what else do you want to cover to give us the stage?
- I'll mention Jinja and Click really briefly
because these two libraries are also huge.
They're used everywhere, downloaded a ton.
Jinja is a templating library.
Like you write template files
and then you can render them with variables
to produce output, HTML, you know,
but also like text files or all sorts of stuff.
- Yeah, I think people--
- It's a little expensive.
- Yeah, I think people pigeonhole Jinja2 much.
They think, okay, well, I'm generating dynamic HTML
from a server request.
Like you can use Jinja to generate all sorts of files.
I use it on stuff, basically on Python generate like emails.
Somebody wants to reset their password, right?
Like I'll generate up an email body from it, for example,
right, that kind of stuff.
- Yeah, and then Click is a,
just like Flask is a framework for web applications,
Click is a framework for command line applications.
And both of these libraries have gotten a lot of attention
from me, but they are not at inbox zero.
Unlike the other libraries,
I have not managed to get them down there
because I was working on the other libraries.
And so these are where I'm like gonna need to focus.
Like I said, like my current focus for the rest
of this year is writing maintainer documentation.
So I'm trying to do less code.
And all of these libraries are stable.
Everybody downloads them.
Like ton of people download them, they all work.
You know, we can make them better and everything,
but they're not in like, it's not like they're
in immediate danger or need of anything.
But I do want to like clear out the backlogs of those as well.
And, you know, looking for more contributors for that,
to help with that.
- Yeah, you said you're looking for contributors
who are really psyched about typing and also first-
- Scott, if anybody knows, like is an expert in typing
and like type annotations and static type tools,
all the libraries do pass mypy strict tests and export.
They're like, we do do some testing
against pyright to some degree, but I'm just typing.
Just, it's very hard for me to understand.
Like it's a very complicated subject on its own
versus all the other stuff I have to be doing.
So I really would like somebody who's like,
I am an expert at typing.
I'm gonna like start fixing up what you're,
'cause I like had to learn typing
as I was like adding it to these libraries.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, that's a big thing that we can improve.
- Okay.
- And yeah, you know, there's like,
we've gotten a lot of the stuff in Click and Jinja also.
We have PRs for a lot of stuff.
It's just a matter of me having the time to go through
and review all of them to cut down that backlog,
but we're getting there.
I'll get there eventually.
- Yeah, beautiful.
- And then the last, so the last thing I wanna mention,
or we ran out of time completely,
is besides Palettes, the core projects itself,
I've kind of mentioned this theme of trying to make
the projects more maintainable
and grow the community and the team.
And part of that that I've started identifying
is the greater ecosystem around these projects.
So Flask is great to use on its own,
but it's made even better by all the extensions out there
that people have written, you know,
for doing email, doing database stuff, authentication,
all sorts of things.
And just like Flask itself, you know,
and all those libraries,
there was a long period where they weren't getting
as maintained, you know, as much attention and stuff.
And then I started stepping in.
A lot of those extensions were written
quite a long time ago now,
and the maintainers of those have kind of moved on
to different things.
And so there's a lot of stuff in the ecosystem
that isn't getting as much attention as it needs.
And a lot of the times the maintainers are aware of this,
and they're willing to like to take help,
you know, to get help with those things.
And so I was really inspired by a project
for Django extensions called Jazzband.
- Oh yeah.
- Where basically they're an organization that says,
are you a popular Django extension or Pip, or pip-tools?
For some reason, they also control pip-tools,
but do you not have time to be the maintainer of it anymore?
Come over to Jazzband.
We'll, you'll still be like,
you can still be involved in the project,
but we'll also help you find more people from the community.
Like we will open up the maintaining process
to your interested users in the community.
And so I'm doing a similar thing with palettes.
Called palettes eco for ecosystem.
- Okay.
- So if you go to github.com/palettes-eco.
- With an S?
- Yeah, palettes-eco.github.
What we've started to do is reach out to maintainers
of like Flask SQLAlchemy, Flask admin, Flask security, Flask mail,
Blinker, caching, debug toolbar,
like all these huge extensions.
So many of them have these huge backlogs,
just like Flask and all the other projects did
when I got started with them, you know,
and their maintainers are overwhelmed.
And so I reach out to them.
I've been reaching out to them and kind of explaining,
hey, we're starting this thing up.
Do you want to add your project?
So we've had some success already.
We've had people at sprints contribute to them.
And like I was talking about,
I've kind of standardized how Flask and the other projects look,
like all the tools they're using, the layouts they're using,
the workflows they're using.
I'm taking that same approach and trying to standardize
all the extensions we get too.
So the idea is that anybody who's used to contributing
to one of these extensions, it should be just as familiar to them
to jump into another extension and contribute there as well, right?
- Yeah, that's a great idea, yeah.
And so with Pallets Eco, we can help find maintainers
from the community, add them.
But the core team for Pallets themselves still has access as well.
So, you know, if we make some change to Flask,
it finally removes something that, like some internal thing
that somebody was relying on,
and like suddenly this popular live extension no longer works.
We at least have access.
Like we're probably not gonna take on the responsibility
of being the core maintainers of all these things,
but we can step in and make an emergency release that just,
"Oh, you just need to change this line here.
Make a bug fix release really quick."
So we can at least keep the ecosystem going
while we work on finding longer term sustainability
with more maintainers.
- I love that idea.
'Cause a lot of times it is a really small change,
but if it doesn't work, it doesn't work, right?
- Right, exactly.
Like a lot of the times it's been like,
we have made like little deprecations
and then remittals and stuff,
which have just, that was the one thing
that some random extension was relying on
that like half the ecosystem ended up relying on.
And we just had to like, you know, change a line
or change an import or add an argument.
- Yeah.
- So yeah, like that's my big focus now.
If people are interested in contributing to Pallets,
they're welcome to, you know, contribute to like Jinja
and Click or any of the projects as well.
If there's open issues, they can work on them.
But like a huge new source of like involvement
for people can be, what are the extensions you're using?
Let's get you involved in those as well.
- Yeah, it makes a lot of sense
because to make a change to Flask
is that's a highly polished piece of software,
but the extensions potentially are more open
to just jumping in and getting into it.
- Yeah, it's really hard for people,
it's hard to tell people this,
but like, you know, people come in excited,
like, oh, I want to contribute to Flask.
And then they look at it and they're like,
oh, three open issues, what do I do?
You know, or like, and these three issues
are like really low level stuff
or like they've already been handled or something.
- Sure.
- And so we like, yeah, like what we're telling people now
is like, okay, well, Flask, not only is it made up
of these five other libraries,
but there's also this whole extension ecosystem
out there for you to contribute to.
Like everybody's heard of Flask, you know,
so we can point them at the right place.
They come to us and then we point them to the community.
- Yeah, excellent.
Well, I'll be sure to link to that in the show notes as well.
- Yeah.
- And with that, I think we're out of time.
Thank you for being here.
Just final call to action, you know,
people either want to contribute
or just want to use Flask, what do you tell them?
- Yeah, yeah, so like I said,
we're like developing Palettes Eco.
I'm currently writing maintainer documentation,
so it'll make it easier for people
to get involved in that way.
I'm writing a new website with a lot
of our policies and everything,
but the main point of contact for all of this
and the way we could coordinate with our community
is on our Discord server.
So if you go to discord.gg/palettes,
that will let you join the Palettes server.
It's, you know, open to everybody.
We need help, you know,
not only contributing to the libraries,
but answering questions in our questions channel,
or, you know, like triaging issues
and all sorts of things.
There's lots of different ways to be involved
in the projects without writing code,
and it all starts on that Discord server.
- Awesome.
Well, thanks again for being here
and catch you next time.
- Yeah, thank you.
- Bye.